DOC-5371 - two phase finality documentation and release notes (#1655)
corda/corda-docs-portal: content/en/platform/corda/4.11/enterprise/finality-flow-recovery.md

data class FlowTimeWindow(val fromTime: Instant? = null, val untilTime: Instant? = null)
```

In addition to the recovery operations, the following flow status operations (and associated Node Shell commands) have
been added to the `NodeFlowStatusRpcOps` extension RPC API:

```kotlin
    /**
     * @param flowId the flowId to return information for
     * @return FlowTransaction object describing flow transaction details.
     */
    @RpcPermissionGroup(READ_ONLY)
    fun getFlowTransaction(flowId: String): FlowTransactionInfo?

    /**
     * @param txnId the transaction to return information for
     * @return FlowTransaction object describing flow transaction details.
     */
    @RpcPermissionGroup(READ_ONLY)
    fun getFlowTransactionByTxnId(txnId: String): FlowTransactionInfo?
```

There operations are useful for identifying failed finality flows and return flow transaction information including the
additional recovery metadata:

```kotlin
data class FlowTransactionInfo(
        val stateMachineRunId: StateMachineRunId,
        val txId: String,
        val status: TransactionStatus,
        val timestamp: Instant,
        val initiator: CordaX500Name? = null,

>         val peers: Set<CordaX500Name>? = null

Reviewer: review all code snippets and make the indent consistent

```kotlin
val status = flowClient.proxy.recoverFinalityFlow(flowHandle.id, forceRecover = true)
```

{{< note >}}
It is a common scenario for a `ReceiveFinalityFlow` receiver to be put into a hospitalized state should the
`FinalityFlow` initiator fail at certain specific points in the protocol.
{{< /note >}}

To recover a single finality flow by transaction id, call `recoverFinalityFlowByTxnId`:

```kotlin
val status = flowClient.proxy.recoverFinalityFlowByTxnId(stx.id)
```

To recover multiple finality flow(s) by transaction id, call `recoverFinalityFlowByTxnIds`:

```kotlin
val resultMap = flowClient.proxy.recoverFinalityFlowByTxnIds(setOf(stx1.id, stx2,id))
```

To recover all finality flow(s), call `recoverAllFinalityFlows`:

```kotlin
val resultMap = flowClient.proxy.recoverAllFinalityFlows()
```

To recover all finality flow(s) for a given timeframe using a matching criteria, call `recoverFinalityFlowsMatching`:

```kotlin
val resultMap = flowRPC.proxy.recoverFinalityFlowsMatching(
                        FlowRecoveryQuery(timeframe = FlowTimeWindow(
                                fromTime = startTime,
                                untilTime = endTime

>                         )))

Reviewer: here's an incosistency indent example

Author: Fixed, also went through other Kotlin excerpts.

---
date: '2023-03-30T12:00:00Z'
menu:
  corda-enterprise-4-11:
    parent: corda-enterprise-4-11-cordapps-flows
tags:
- flow
- two
- phase
- finality
- recovery
title: Finality Flow Recovery
weight: 45
---

# Finality Flow Recovery

[Two Phase Finality]({{< relref "two-phase-finality.md" >}}) introduces recovery metadata and a new transaction status of `IN_FLIGHT` to denote that a transaction has not yet been fully finalized. The protocol stores the additional flow transaction recovery metadata upon initially recording an unnotarized transaction. This metadata is used to enable **initiator** and **receiver** recovery should a flow fail at some point within the finality protocol.

Specifically, the `FinalityFlow` initiator stores:

* The Corda X.500 name of the **initiator** party.

> * The list of Corda X.500 names of the **other parties** we share the transaction with. These include participants on the transaction contract, plus any additional sessions passed into FinalityFlow, such as **observer** nodes.

Author: Done

> * The list of Corda X.500 names of the **other parties** we share the transaction with. These include participants on the transaction contract, plus any additional sessions passed into FinalityFlow, such as **observer** nodes.

Author: Updated to the initiator.

* The `StatesToRecord` status (the default value is `ONLY_RELEVANT`). This status determines if states are recorded in the vault for a node.

The `ReceiveFinalityFlow` receiver stores:

* The Corda X.500 name of the initiator party.
* The `StatesToRecord` status (described above).

> The initiator of a `FinalityFlow` transaction will store all the above recovery metadata locally. The list of participants

Author: Done

is not shared across the network, and is private only to the initiator.

The receiver of a shared `FinalityFlow` transaction will only receive and record who the initiator is and the `StatesToRecord` status.

A finality flow transaction is recoverable when its transaction status is `IN_FLIGHT`. This could be at either or both of the initiator and receiver(s) sides, depending on how far the finality protocol progressed before failure at a given participant:

* If the initiator reached a point whereby the transaction was successfully notarized, then recovery can be executed at either, or both, the initiator and receiver sides:

>   * If the initiator triggers recovery first, it will not be necessary for the receiver to perform the same.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * If the initiator triggers recovery first, it is not necessary for the receiver to perform the same.

```

>   * If  the receiver triggers recovery first, then the initiator must also follow (only if it also failed after the notarization step).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * If the receiver triggers recovery first, then the initiator must also follow (only if it also failed after the notarization step).

```

Author: Done

* If notarization has not yet taken place, then recovery must be triggered from the initiator side only.
* If the initiator of a transaction successfully notarized and finalized, it is possible to trigger recovery of failed peers by triggering recovery on the initiator side and specifying the transaction ID to recover.

{{< warning >}}
Finality flow failure typically leads to temporal ledger inconsistency. The following scenarios are possible with Two Phase Finality:
* The initiator completes successfully and races ahead to use any output states from a previously finalized transaction before receivers of the original transaction have finalized (or failed prior to finalization).
* The receiver completes successfully before the initiator completes finalization. This may happen after the initiator successfully sends the notary signature to the receiver(s) but then fails prior to finalizing its own transaction.
{{< /warning >}}

> The state machine enables you to recover finality flows that are in a `FAILED` checkpoint flow status. An optional `force-recover` flag also forces recovery of any finality flows that are in a `RUNNABLE`, `PAUSED` or `HOSPITALIZED`  checkpoint flow status.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The state machine enables you to recover finality flows that are in a `FAILED` checkpoint flow status. An optional `force-recover` flag also forces recovery of any finality flows that are in a `RUNNABLE`, `PAUSED`, or `HOSPITALIZED` checkpoint flow status.

```

Author: Done

an issuance transaction may also be recovered. That is, should an issuance transaction fail to broadcast the transaction
to an observer peer, it will be possible to invoke the recovery flow at the initiator to ensure the transaction is correctly
re-distributed to that observer peer.

{{< note >}}
For the purpose of performance optimization, issuance transactions are not intermediately stored with an `IN_FLIGHT` status.
All recovery metadata is directly stored as part of initiator finalization with a status of 'VERIFIED`.
{{< /note >}}

## How to recover finality flows

You can recover a finality flow by using any of the following methods:

* The extensions `FlowRPCOps` RPC API
* Node Shell commands
* Directly invoking the recovery flow, either from the Node Shell or programatically within a CorDapp:

```kotlin
net.corda.node.internal.recovery.FinalityRecoveryFlow
```

All recovery operations return the following:

*  **true** if a transaction is successfully recovered.
*  **false** if a transaction does not require recovery.
*  **FlowRecoveryException** if there is an error whilst performing recovery.

> ### Recovering finality flows using the extensions `FlowRPCOps` RPC API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Recovering finality flows using the extensions `FlowRPCOps` RPC API
```

Author: Done

)
```

{{< warning >}}
Finality flow recovery requires that your Corda network has a minimum platform version of 4, as the `TransactionnotarizationCheckFlow`
used internally by `FinalityPeerRecoveryFlow` uses [reference states]({{< relref "key-concepts-transactions.md#reference-states" >}}).

{{< /warning >}}

### Recovering finality flows from the shell

The following examples show the different ways to use the finality flow query and recovery commands.

To check the status of a flow as a `FinalityFlow` initiator:

```bash
flowStatus queryFinalityById e0d781be-b4ab-43e0-b694-e97cc4eaa6ee

FlowTransactionInfo(stateMachineRunId=[e0d781be-b4ab-43e0-b694-e97cc4eaa6ee], txId=19BE64484D3CBF532A8FB2ACA1AEACA38B1FBA3C38B0518B7F5316AC9E79432F, status=IN_FLIGHT, timestamp=2023-03-29T11:16:29.477Z, initiator=O=Alice Corp, L=Madrid, C=ES, peers=[O=Bob Plc, L=Rome, C=IT])
---
- stateMachineRunId:
    uuid: "e0d781be-b4ab-43e0-b694-e97cc4eaa6ee"
  txId: "19BE64484D3CBF532A8FB2ACA1AEACA38B1FBA3C38B0518B7F5316AC9E79432F"
  status: "IN_FLIGHT"
  initiator:
    x500Principal:
      name: "O=Alice Corp,L=Madrid,C=ES"
  peers:
    x500Principal:
      name: "O=Bob Plc,L=Rome,C=IT"
```
{{< note >}}

> * `initiator` refers to myself as caller of the command.

Reviewer 2: Is "myself" the correct term to use?

```

Further information explaining why a flow failed to recover can be found in the node logs.
A prime example is attempting to recover a flow that has already completed successfully.
The node logs will show the following message:

```bash
Recovery not possible for transaction with status VERIFIED
```

To recover a failed finality flow by using the transaction ID:

```bash
flow recoverFinalityByTxnId 7E7EE31CA6371D73CDDB1A7992E239CE222606EA845F1ABC87995898017904A4
Recovered finality flow [821884be-8e9f-486d-8228-70d97e215218]
```
Should recovery fail, you will see the following response:

```bash
Failed to recover finality flow 7E7EE31CA6371D73CDDB1A7992E239CE222606EA845F1ABC87995898017904A4
```

After successfully recovering a finality flow, the flow transaction status should move to `VERIFIED`.

To recover all failed finality flows in one operation:

```bash
flow recoverAllFinality
Recovered finality flow(s)
Results: [[4cbfa031-90de-4564-a375-30141a18bbba]=true]
```

{{< note >}}
This operation returns a list of flow identifier/Boolean (success/failure) pairs.
In all other cases, the shell prints a message stating if the operation succeeded or not.
{{< /note >}}

> To recover all failed finality flows, including those in a PAUSED or HOSPITALIZED checkpoint state:

Reviewer 2: Should PAUSED and HOSPITALIZED be in code? Think they were previously. Maybe check throughout.

Author: Done

    flowStartFromTime: "2023-12-04T10:15:30.00", \
    flowStartUntilTime: "2023-12-05T10:15:30.00Z", \
    initiatedBy: "O=PartyA,L=London,C=GB", \
    counterParties: ["O=PartyA,L=London,C=GB", "O=PartyB,L=London,C=GB"]
```
Note, at least one custom criteria option must be specified.

### Recovering Finality flows from RPC

To pause and retry flows from an RPC Client using the extensions RPC Interface (`FlowRPC`), use the Multi RPC Client - `MultiRPCClient`.

{{< note >}}
For more information about `MultiRPCClient`, see [Interacting with a node: Building the Multi RPC Client ]({{< relref "node/operating/clientrpc.md#building-the-multi-rpc-client" >}}).
{{< /note >}}

First, instantiate a `MultiRPCClient` for `FlowRPC` (this differs from the standard non-extensions RPC interface):

```kotlin
val username = "testuser"
val password = "password"
val rpcHostAndPort = NetworkHostAndPort("localhost", 10006)
val flowClient = MultiRPCClient(rpcHostAndPort, FlowRPCOps::class.java, username, password).start().getOrThrow()
```

To recover a single finality flow by ID, call `recoverFinalityFlow`:

```kotlin
val status = flowClient.proxy.recoverFinalityFlow(flowHandle.id)
```

> This method will return a **status** of `true` if the operation was successful, or `false` otherwise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This method returns a **status** of `true` if the operation was successful, or `false` otherwise.

```

Author: Done

To recover multiple finality flows by ID, call `recoverFinalityFlows`:

```kotlin
val resultMap = flowClient.proxy.recoverFinalityFlows(setOf(flowHandle1.id, flowHandle2.id))
```

> This method will return a **resultMap** (`Map<StateMachineRunId, Boolean>`), consisting of a collection of flow identifier/Boolean (success/failure) entries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This method returns a **resultMap** (`Map<StateMachineRunId, Boolean>`), consisting of a collection of flow identifier/Boolean (success/failure) entries.

```

Author: Done

```kotlin
val status = flowClient.proxy.recoverFinalityFlow(flowHandle.id, forceRecover = true)
```

{{< note >}}
It is a common scenario for a `ReceiveFinalityFlow` receiver to be put into a hospitalized state should the
`FinalityFlow` initiator fail at certain specific points in the protocol.
{{< /note >}}

To recover a single finality flow by transaction ID, call `recoverFinalityFlowByTxnId`:

```kotlin
val status = flowClient.proxy.recoverFinalityFlowByTxnId(stx.id)
```

To recover multiple finality flows by transaction ID, call `recoverFinalityFlowByTxnIds`:

```kotlin
val resultMap = flowClient.proxy.recoverFinalityFlowByTxnIds(setOf(stx1.id, stx2,id))
```

To recover all finality flows, call `recoverAllFinalityFlows`:

```kotlin
val resultMap = flowClient.proxy.recoverAllFinalityFlows()
```

To recover all finality flows for a given timeframe using a matching criteria, call `recoverFinalityFlowsMatching`:

```kotlin
val resultMap = flowRPC.proxy.recoverFinalityFlowsMatching(
    FlowRecoveryQuery(timeframe = FlowTimeWindow(
        fromTime = startTime,
        untilTime = endTime
        )    
    )
)

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: Done

```kotlin
val resultMap = flowRPC.proxy.recoverFinalityFlowsMatching(
    FlowRecoveryQuery(initiatedBy = CHARLIE_NAME))
```

To recover all finality flows with Charlie as peer using a matching criteria, call `recoverFinalityFlowsMatching`:

```kotlin
val resultMap = flowRPC.proxy.recoverFinalityFlowsMatching(
    FlowRecoveryQuery(counterParties = listOf(CHARLIE_NAME)))
```

To prevent server-side resource leakage, use `flowClient.close()` to close `flowClient` when finished.

### Querying Finality flows from RPC

Instantiate a `MultiRPCClient` for `NodeFlowStatusRpcOps` as follows:

```kotlin
val username = "testuser"
val password = "password"
val rpcHostAndPort = NetworkHostAndPort("localhost", 10006)
val flowClient = MultiRPCClient(rpcHostAndPort, NodeFlowStatusRpcOps::class.java, username, password).start().getOrThrow()
```

To query a flow transaction by flow ID, call `getFlowTransaction`:

```kotlin
val flowInfo = flowClient.proxy.getFlowTransaction(flowHandle.id)
```

Similarly, to query a flow transaction by transaction ID, call `getFlowTransactionByTxnId`:

```kotlin
val flowInfo = flowClient.proxy.getFlowTransactionByTxnId(txnId)
```

> Both these methods will return a **FlowTransactionInfo** object if the flow transaction exists.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both these methods return a **FlowTransactionInfo** object if the flow transaction exists.

```

Author: Done

> #### Implementation ####

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Implementation
```

Author: Done

`FinalityRecoveryFlow` is the primary flow that orchestrates recovery by identifying whether initiator or peer recovery
is required according to the flow transaction recovery metadata.

Where this flow is called from a node that is:
* An initiator to a transaction, then the subflow `FinalityInitiatorRecoveryFlow` is called.
* A peer to a transaction, then the subflow `FinalityPeerRecoveryFlow` is called.

Finality flow recovery uses a suite of internal flows which implement similar functionality to the actual `FinalityFlow`
and `ReceiveFinalityFlow`. These internal flows are:

```kotlin
net.corda.node.internal.recovery.FinalityInitiatorRecoveryFlow
net.corda.node.internal.recovery.FinalityPeerRecoveryFlow
net.corda.node.internal.recovery.TransactionnotarizationCheckFlow
```

`TransactionnotarizationCheckFlow` is a helper flow used by the `FinalityPeerRecoveryFlow` that determines whether

> a [SignedTransaction] has been previously notarized.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a `SignedTransaction` has been previously notarized.

```

Author: Done
